---
title:  How I...
date:   2018-08-21 00:00:01 +0200
tags:	ios swift
---


After years of development, I have come to a point where I'm pretty happy with my
current iOS development setup, Swift coding practices, toolbox etc. Sure, if I
return to a project that I create today in a year or so, I will most definitely
find many of my current practices and patterns to be strange or just plain stupid,
but that is just life, I guess.

However, since I have made many conscious decisions about everything from project
setup, dependency injection, localization, asset management etc. for a long time,
I think it may be time to write some of these things down. At the very least, it
will serve as a personal self-reference of sorts, but hopefully it may be of help
to others as well.

So, given this and the fact that I used to love to blog about software development
before I became a parent, I think that this could be a nice opportunity to return
to writing in a more structured form. Let me tell you about the topics that I have
in mind and how I plan to do this. Before I proceed, please note that these topics
regard iOS development using Swift and Xcode.


## Topics

I have gone through most of my iOS projects and come up with a list of topics that
I would love to write about. Please let me know if you have any suggestions on how
to improve this list, if you miss any topics etc.

Each post will (probably) be prefixed with "How I..." and suffixed with the topic
in question, which means that the posts will be called something like:

How I...
 * setup a MacBook from scratch
 * share Xcode snippets between projects
 * structure my iOS projects
 * use Fastlane for automation
 * handle depencencies with Carthage and CocoaPods
 * setup IoC and dependency injection in Swift 
 * localize my iOS apps
 * handle color assets in my iOS apps
 * handle image assets in my iOS apps
 * unit test my iOS apps 
 * work with Alamofire and external api:s
 * work domain-driven in Swift
 * work with protocols in Swift
 * use the decorator pattern in Swift
 * implement iOS app navigation
 * handle notifications in Swift
 * extend protocol-based Swift collections

As you can see, this list is pretty chaotic and little more than a brain dump.
I have tried to group topics that are somewhat related, but I guess that it will
be an ongoing effort. What matters most to me is that each post is relevant, and
not that the list above is as well structured as possible.


## How I plan to do this

I will take on this as an open process, where I'd love any readers to reach out
with comments, suggestions, discussions, links to related blog posts, corrections
etc. I know that the amount of readers is very (very) small, but I would love for
those of you who find these posts interesting to reach out in any way you like.

I plan to write one post each week. Given the varying complexity of the different
topics, the posts will range from short and very concrete posts to longer and more
abstract discussions. I will, however, always try to include hands-on information,
code samples, screenshots and maybe even links to GitHub example and demo repos.

The topic list above is a first draft, where I'll gather all topics that come to
mind. The list will probably evolve as I proceed. Topics may be added, renamed and
rearranged, but as soon as a topic is written, I will link the list to that post
Hopefully, this will end up with a list where each topic is linked to a blog post.

If you have any suggestions regarding this process idea, please let me know.


All the best

Daniel Saidi



