---
title:  "New year, new habits"
date:   2017-01-23 01:09:02 +0100
tags:	git hobby-projects jekyll
---


I finally made it! After years and years of "I really shouldn't", I finally got
around to abandon my old hosting provider and move all my sites to GitHub.

For years now, I have had to use FTP to update my various sites, since my old
hosting provider hasn't really kept up for the last couple of years. This has
let to me now updating my sites so often, since it has become a real hassle.
In a world where I enjoy using git almost everywhere, these old ways had to end.

Since this decision was made just before my hosting was cancelled, I was in a bit
of a rush to get this in place. This was perfect, since it forced me to get this
done, instead of spending another year in FTP hell. I thus decided to freeze my
various sites in a temporary state and quickly push them to [GitHub](http://github.com),
which lets you host static sites for free. Since they also lets you connect your
custom domain names for free, this was a golden start.

At first, I decided to disable `Jekyll` for all sites (more on that later), since
it is enabled by default and I didn't have time to learn it before my hosting got
cancelled. However, as I finished moving my sites, I decided to to dig into this
great tool and enable it for this web site as a start.

I will dedicate a separate post to describe how I've setup Jekyll, but I just want
to quickly describe it, if you happen to be unfamiliar with it.

In short, [Jekyll](http://jekyllrb.com) is a `static site generator`, which lets
you build static web sites (html + css + javascript), using really convenient
tools like data files, layout files, pages, blog posts, custom collections etc.
It's nothing less than amazing and the resulting pages are lightning fast, since
there's no backend or database...just plain files.

It's rather ironic that I've spent so much time getting good at system development,
just to end up using a static site generator, but you have to be pragmatic to pick
the best tool for the job. And in this case, Jekyll is just awesome.

With all this in place, I will begin to move my blog from [Wordpress](http://danielsaidi.wordpress.com)
to this web site as well. Wordpress has been terrible when it comes to writing
about tech and code. Instead, I will now use Jekyll and write my posts in `MarkDown`,
which will be a huge relief.

So, I will begin to move my blog shortly, deleting obsolete ones that perhaps are
not that relevant anymore. I will remove the moved blog posts from Wordpress, which
will eventually end up in an empty site.

Until I have completed this tedious task, all my old posts can be found at [Wordpress](http://danielsaidi.wordpress.com).

All the best

Daniel